---
title: "Post: Passive yet Drastic: Canadian Secularism against Canadian Women"
categories:
  - Blog
  - Digital project
tags:
  - Post Format
  - woman and religion
  - class
 
---
**Info Notice:** Read the blog post [Let's Learn Secularism: A history lesson](#https://evphobic.github.io/blog/post-quote/). To learn more about what secularism is and the concepts it's built off of for background knowledge about this post. {: .notice--info}


How much religion is too much? If someone asked you right now to pick between being treated equally but having to give up your religion or being who you are knowing you won’t be treated equally for it what would you choose? Think about it. It’s a hypothetical question though so it doesn’t have to be taken seriously…right? But what if it wasn’t. That’s the reality of what it’s like for a lot of religious identifying women of colour in society. Being faced with choices such as picking between being faithful in your religion or treated fairly as a woman in your own workplace. As a minority within a minority the perspective of feeling isolated in a place you’d call your home is an unfortunate situation a lot of Canadian women are faced with. Especially when that treatment is portrayed through the actions of your own government. Within the constant progression towards secularism and fair treatment, the hyperfocus of one goal has now become a tunnel vision journey blind to the consequences. But how do we call these actions out? Where do we begin to define such terms? Well luckily for you guys I’ve done the research, I looked up the terms and have calculated all the numbers (there were little to no numbers involved). So have no fear, I’m here to tell you what’s going on, who’s involved, and what we (the government) could do. To say it in a more professional tone, this blog post seeks to investigate how secular frameworks may reinforce gender bias and religious discrimination in modern Canada, and introduce a transformative approach for public institutions and legislation to advance gender equality and dismantle misogynistic structures. But to do thst you need to do some basic term learning. Luckily I have another post that helps you with exactly that! So if you haven't already go check it out and then come back and let's discuss!

Now that we’re familiar with these terms and what they mean we can start to conclude how diverse the spectrum of secularism is, the types of forms it can be manifested in and the potential it has to be used. Knowing all this we can even pinpoint the type of secularism being used in the event of gender-bias discrimination and how Canadian legislation has interpreted it throughout our constitution and bill-making process and how that further shaped the public’s external perception. 

After all that background information we are now fully equipped to investigate the type of secularism used in Canadian politics and legislation and the after effects it has on our women and the general public. When we look at how secularist ideology has influenced our Canadian laws there is a bigger unnoticed picture to note on how it is used. When it comes to secularism usage in the political system two types are used, passive secularism or assertive secularism. The chapter “Secularism” in The Routledge Handbook of Religion, Politics, and Ideology dives into the concept of these terms perfectly. These types of frameworks have a great influence on building public policy and how we as a society understand the relationship between religious institutions and the state. (Draaisma and Wilson, 2022, 26) Authors Draaisma and Wilson explain “states governed predominately by passive secularism may allow or even foster public expressions of religion and the involvement of religious organizations in public life.”(28) Canada definitively borders on as a passively secularized government, we can see examples of this (name an example). As a deemed multicultural country, passive secularism relatively helps create the opportunity for those of different backgrounds to feel included and celebrated. We can see this through the creation of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms and how it seeks to act on the commitment to being an inclusive and diplomatic country amongst all citizens no matter their ethnic origin. Though that is the overall intention to provide in the Canadian experience that does not mean that it is executed as such. The objective of being a multiculturalist society does not only stop at the encompassing of others and their background but allows cultural acculturation as well. Writer Ayelet Shachar of the article, Squaring the Circle of Multiculturalism? Religious Freedom and Gender Equality in Canada, helps us to properly address the distinction by the introduction of terms, fair inclusion vs privatized diversity:

> Fair inclusion refers to various legal measures designed to permit individuals to participate fully in the public spaces shared among democratic citizens, while expressing, if they wish to do some certain religious (or other group-based) identity markers. Privatized diversity refers not to claims for inclusion in the wider society, but to demands for insulation if not outright immunization from the purview of the legal order enacted by the state, in the name of promoting a community;s unique ways of life in the face of an “encroaching: constitutional order. (32)

The distinction between these two terms paints out the struggle Canadian politics makes consistently by trying to promote diversity and equality simultaneously. The issue of using a passive secularist framework can influence that greatly, due to the issue of a potential religious hierarchy at play. Though passive secularism does not intend to purposely segregate or isolate all religions from the public it does not intend a neutral lens towards different religious communities as well. Christianity, for exampl,e is perceived as a more positive and promoted religion in the public sphere within Canada, while religions such as Islam do not have that same effect. Though Canadian politics intends to promote equal respect for all cultures and backgrounds within its society there’s a contradictory observance that is not aligned with that. The case of “R. v Big M Drug Mart Ltd” from the Supreme Court of Canada, which allowed the federal prevention of businesses opening on Sunday in sanctitude of the Christian sabbath,  can be used as an example. Though it may be viewed as Christianity being the majority demographic of religious identity, there are still the outlying minority of other religious associations as well. Shacar writes “to accept that parliament retains the right to compel universal observance of the day of rest preferred by one religion [the dominant majority religion] is not consistent with the preservation and enhancement of the multicultural heritage of Canadians” (38) With the inconsistencies displayed amongst the Canadian government this has proved troubling in the governance of women and contribution to gender discrimination. These frameworks begin to intertwine within the concept of modernism and colonialism, which contribute to the binaries of male/female and tradition/modern unintentionally influencing areas of public policy. This can be done by the reinforcement and contribution of certain religious actors, sources of knowledge and rights that can promote the segregation and marginalization of minority groups. Especially when the aim of religious freedom in the Canadian Charter's Rights and Freedoms is conjoined to the respect of minority communities, women of religious identities are susceptible to this systemic imbalance of power. This phenomenon will be discussed through case-study examples of the Citizenship and Immigration Canada ministry and the creation of Bill 21 in Quebec. 

In 2011 there was a release of an “internal ministerial set of guidelines” in regard to the Canadian citizenship ceremony and the instructions for potential citizens that Citizenship and Immigration Canada staff were to uphold. These guidelines detailed the taking of the citizenship oath and prohibited the wearing of any facial clothing while swearing to it. The minister doubled down on these rules by justifying that the taking of the oath is important to be administered in a public and open manner therefore wearing a face covering offensively eliminates the nature of expressing loyalty to Canada in front of fellow citizens. This reasoning which the minister used causes a strong questioning in the reinforcement of Canadian values and nationalism. As a self-reclaimed multiculturalist land, how does the forcible unveiling of newly migrants entering the country give the impression of a pluralistic society? These decisions and rules reinforce the position of majority religious groups within the public domain. The heightened focus on showcasing 'loyalty' by eliminating specific markers of religious or identity-based minority affiliations is, unfortunately, at odds with the true essence and principles of fair inclusion. (Shachar, 2016, 57) It also carries a heavy gender-discriminative narrative due to the majority of the demographic effected by this being women. These actions further uphold a gender-based religious prejudice and marginalize the minorities within a minority whilst trying to promote a secularist framework.

Another example of this power struggle is the controversial introduction and passing of Bill 21 in Quebec legislation. Bill 21 which to put it simply, banned all religious symbols and dressing for workers in public institutions, has quickly and effectively tested the boundaries of secularism and religious freedom. This public policy has revealed a distasteful social perception and stigma especially pertaining to Muslim women and arguably has fostered an Islamophobic space in Quebec society. Though the introduction and objective of this bill is to reinforce a more religious-neutral environment it broadly disputes the constitutional right of freedom of conscience and religion in the Canadian Charter. (Hussain, 2024, 32) The law also creates a major discussion of the sincerity of Canada’s multiculturalism and passive secularist framework used in legislative governance. It repromotes the religious hierarchy we had discussed which further ostracizes and undertakes the recognition of other minority religious groups through exclusion. These efforts also cultivate the enforcement of “de-veiling” and the Western perspective of the veil as a symbol of women’s oppression. As several Quebec ministers have outwardly stated their opinion on the Muslim veil/hijab and its seemingly association with “oppression” following this bill. Author Nooreen Hussain in, Exploring the racial and gendered dimensions of Quebecois Secularism, referenced the Quebec Minister for Status of Women who iterates that the covering is gender-oppressive and doesn’t align with the values of women’s freedom (32). Though the introduction of Bill 21 is not the main culprit of the targeted racialization of Muslim women it has surely cultivated such activity.  In a CBC news article, a survey was administered in Quebec following the passing of this bill and its effect on religious minorities. The report from survey reported Muslim women being most negatively affected by the bill, with 47% saying they’d been treated unfairly by a person in a position of authority and 78% saying their feeling of being accepted as a full-fledged member of Quebec society had inexplicitly worsened. Quebec’s government has shown the right to religious identity and freedom is cast as a tangential value towards the goal of gender equality amid passive secularist governing. In the grand scheme of Canada’s deemed pluralistic and diverse society, these restrictive and apprehensive policy-makings that potentially target a minority group alter the perspective of their reputation and reestablishes a prejudicial feeling by those affected. So how can Canada stay true to its word and contextualize itself to promote the concept of equality and inclusivity?

Through the makings and critical analysis of others in support of this research, I introduce an idea stemming from (the source) as a better approach to tackling this issue. The recognition of secularism through an ontological lens rather than an ideology. Draaisma and Wilson explore their own take on this phenomenon by saying “Secularism as an ontology allows us to see the religious and the secular as components of the same broader category and enables us to recognize the power imbalance between the two.” (33) When we properly address the bias and hierarchy of influence through the usage of a passive secularist framework we can create a space to listen and learn from other ontologies and create better responses when faced with critical issues that address these concepts. This could mean promoting more minority actors in legislative spaces and surveying public opinion considering it. Realizing that there’s no universally accepted term for secularism and understanding the effects of it as a spectrum and its use within politics. Identifying the racial and gendered bias of an imbalance of power that is systematically imbued through these methods of policy-making and the imposition it placed on public institutions. Secularism is more than a vision for how the world should be; it is a lived reality for some, one that stands in stark contrast to the worlds of those who view the supernatural and transcendental as essential aspects of their everyday existence. (Draaisma and Wilson, 2022, 33) Through this, we can better create a foundationally institutional pluralistic society, and better uphold the reputation of being a multiculturalist Canadian society. 
